---
title: Why use Blitz instead of Next.js?
sidebar_label: Why Blitz instead of Next.js?
---

### 1. Fullstack instead of Frontend {#1-fullstack-instead-of-frontend}

Next.js is mostly a frontend framework. It's designed for building a
frontend that connects to some other API. Next.js isn't set up by default
for building a true fullstack application.

Blitz adds all the missing features and functionality that turns Next into
a true fullstack framework. These key features include direct database
access, middleware, and authentication.

### 2. Data Layer {#2-data-layer}

The new Blitz data layer is a novel technology for eliminating the API
while retaining client-side rendering. In a Blitz app, you can import your
server code directly into the frontend so you don't need to build an API
and do data fetching from the frontend. At build time, Blitz automatically
inserts an API call that runs the server code on the server. Essentially,
Blitz abstracts your API into a compile step.

This is a game changer for React app development because it eliminates an
entire portion of traditional React app architecture. This means it's
easier to learn, faster to develop, and more fun to build things!

That said, you can continue doing data fetching via REST or GraphQL like
you've always done. Blitz doesn't restrict this in any way.

### 3. Built-in Authentication {#3-built-in-authentication}

Blitz has built-in session management that works with any identity
provider, including self-hosted email/password and third party services.
Authentication is something that's complicated and difficult to implement
correctly. Having it built into Blitz saves you a ton of time and
potential security vulnerabilities.

Building an awesome UX with auth in Next.js is very tricky and tedious,
but Blitz gives you best-in-class DX for free.

### 4. Conventions {#4-conventions}

Next.js does not have any conventions aside from file-system based
routing. This leaves every developer to re-invent the wheel for every
project.

Blitz brings a number of conventions for things like how to organize your
files and how to structure your routes. This means you don't waste any
time figuring this out for every project. It also greatly benefits the
community. Common project structure and architectural patterns allow you
to move from Blitz app to Blitz app and immediately feel at home.

### 5. Code Scaffolding {#5-code-scaffolding}

There are two main ways to reduce the amount of code you have to write by
hand:

1. Code generation
2. Code scaffolding

**Code generation** means a library generates code for you. Examples are
graphql-code-generator which generates code from GraphQL queries and
Hasura which generates an entire GraphQL API from your database schema.
Usually codegen has no way to fully customize the generated code. You're
at the mercy of the library for what it supports. Often you will run into
edge cases that codegen has no solution for. And you can't fix it because
you don't own the code.

**Code scaffolding** means initial code is scaffolded into your project
for you. From then on, you have full ownership over all the code and can
customize it as much you need. A downside of code scaffolding is that you
don't get automatic updates like you do with code generation from a
third-party library. But the huge upside is that you are guaranteed to
never be limited by someone else's design choices which you have no way to
change.

Blitz is a huge fan of code scaffolding. We have a whole slew of
[`blitz generate`](./cli-generate) commands for scaffolding code into your
project. It's still early days for our code scaffolding â€” we have a lot of
powerful features that still need to be added, including the ability to
add your own custom scaffold templates.

### 6. Recipes {#6-recipes}

Recipes are one-line commands for scaffolding code into your project from
an MDX recipe on npm or a git repository.

Examples:

- `blitz install tailwind` - one command to install and configure tailwind
- `blitz install chakra-ui` - one command to install and configure chakra
- `blitz install material-ui` - one command to install and configure
  material-ui

Recipes are super powerful. They can change almost anything in your
project, including adding dependencies, changing code, adding code, etc.
They are written via MDX and can be composed like React components.

### 7. New App Development {#7-new-app-development}

A new Next.js app is totally bare-bones. So every time you start a Next.js
project, you have to spend hours setting up all the basics like eslint,
prettier, husky git hooks, etc.

A new Blitz app saves you a ton of time because all that is pre-configured
for you! For sure you can always customize it later, but having a working
starting point is awesome.

### 8. Relaxed Restrictions {#8-relaxed-restrictions}

Next.js requires all your React pages go in a single `pages/` folder.
Blitz relaxes this restriction by allowing you to have an infinite number
of `pages/` folders.

For large projects this is a huge benefit because you can separate and
organize your pages in any way you want.

Examples:

- `app/pages/` could contain the homepage and pages like "about"
- `app/products/pages/` could contain all the pages related to products
- `app/admin/pages/` could contain all pages related to the backend admin
  section
